Project Gutenberg's The Status of the Jews in Egypt, by W. M. Flinders Petrie

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: The Status of the Jews in Egypt
       The Fifth Arthur Davis Memorial Lecture

Author: W. M. Flinders Petrie

Contributor: Philip Sassoon

Release Date: January 27, 2018 [EBook #56444]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STATUS OF THE JEWS IN EGYPT ***




Produced by MFR and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet Archive)










WORKS OF ISRAEL ZANGWILL


ESSAYS:

    CHOSEN PEOPLES
    THE PRINCIPLE OF NATIONALITIES
    ITALIAN FANTASIES
    WITHOUT PREJUDICE
    THE WAR FOR THE WORLD
    THE VOICE OF JERUSALEM


NOVELS:

    CHILDREN OF THE GHETTO
    DREAMERS OF THE GHETTO
    GHETTO TRAGEDIES
    GHETTO COMEDIES
    THE CELIBATES’ CLUB
    THE GREY WIG: STORIES AND NOVELETTES
    THE KING OF SCHNORRERS
    THE MANTLE OF ELIJAH
    THE MASTER
    THE PREMIER AND THE PAINTER (WITH LOUIS COWEN)
    JINNY THE CARRIER


PLAYS:

    THE MELTING POT: A DRAMA IN FOUR ACTS
    THE NEXT RELIGION: A PLAY IN THREE ACTS
    PLASTER SAINTS: A HIGH COMEDY IN THREE MOVEMENTS
    THE WAR GOD: A TRAGEDY IN FIVE ACTS
    THE COCKPIT: ROMANTIC DRAMA IN THREE ACTS
    THE FORCING HOUSE: TRAGI-COMEDY IN FOUR ACTS


POEMS:

    BLIND CHILDREN


_UNIFORM WITH THIS VOLUME_

Cloth 2/- net. Paper 1/- net.


The Arthur Davis Memorial Lectures:


CHOSEN PEOPLES

By ISRAEL ZANGWILL

_Second Impression_

With a Foreword by the Rt. Hon. Sir HERBERT SAMUEL, M.A., High
Commissioner of Palestine


WHAT THE WORLD OWES TO THE PHARISEES

By the REV. R. TRAVERS HERFORD, B.A.

With a Foreword by General Sir JOHN MONASH, G.C.M.G., K.C.B., D.C.L.


POETRY AND RELIGION

By ISRAEL ABRAHAMS, M.A., D.D.

Reader in Rabbinic at the University of Cambridge

With a Foreword by Sir ARTHUR QUILLER-COUCH, M.A., D.Litt.


SPINOZA AND TIME

By S. ALEXANDER, M.A., LL.D., F.B.A.

Hon. Fellow of Lincoln College, Oxford; Professor of Philosophy in the
University of Manchester

With an Afterword by VISCOUNT HALDANE, O.M., F.R.S.




THE STATUS OF THE JEWS IN EGYPT

    Being the Fifth “Arthur Davis Memorial Lecture” delivered before
    the Jewish Historical Society at University College on Sunday,
    April 30, 1922
    --------------
    Iyar 2, 5682

[Illustration]




[Illustration: FRAGMENT OF AN ANCIENT HEBREW PAPYRUS—THE OLDEST IN THE
WORLD—DISCOVERED BY PROFESSOR FLINDERS PETRIE.

For translation see Appendix.]




                              THE STATUS OF
                            THE JEWS IN EGYPT

                                   BY
                          W. M. FLINDERS PETRIE
                      D.C.L., LL.D., F.R.S., F.B.A.
          _Edwards Professor of Egyptology, University College_

                           WITH A FOREWORD BY
                     Sir PHILIP SASSOON, Bart., M.P.

                    LONDON: GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN LTD.
                  RUSKIN HOUSE, 40 MUSEUM STREET, W.C.1

                          _All rights reserved_

                        _First published in 1922_




NOTE


The Arthur Davis Memorial Lecture was founded in 1917, under the auspices
of the Jewish Historical Society of England, by his collaborators in
the translation of “The Service of the Synagogue,” with the object of
fostering Hebraic thought and learning in honour of an unworldly scholar.
The Lecture is to be given annually in the anniversary week of his death,
and the lectureship is to be open to men or women of any race or creed,
who are to have absolute liberty in the treatment of their subject.




FOREWORD

By Sir PHILIP SASSOON, Bart., M.P.


I thank the Society for the honour they have done me in asking me to
preside upon so interesting an occasion. Professor Petrie needs no
introduction; and I can but express the gratitude of the meeting to
him for coming to lecture on an absorbing topic. We should have to go
very far to find a more eminent Egyptologist. He is not limited to
a discussion and criticism of other men’s discoveries; he is a most
successful excavator himself. He has with his own hands unearthed many
objects of the deepest interest to all students of the remote Egyptian
past. He has been engaged in this work for forty years, during thirty
of which he has occupied the distinguished position of Professor of
Egyptology at this University, where he has spoken with peculiar
authority on the significance of his own and other men’s discoveries,
and has interpreted them to laymen such as myself. The late Arthur
Davis, in whose memory these lectures are held, was a type of that rare
and valuable man who, while engaged in business, is yet inspired by a
studious ambition. He was a man above the average, who taught the lesson
to the average man of affairs that the delights of learning are open to
all those who are able to make use of the opportunities they can find and
create. Such men are an honour to any cultured community.




The Status of the Jews in Egypt


In considering the history of any people, one of the main elements is
that of their status. What were their abilities and how were they shown?
What permanent mark did they make on their period? How did they stand
in reference to their neighbours, in the same country and in other
countries? There are now Jews in Lemberg and Jews in Paris; but how
entirely differently we regard them, because of their status. How utterly
diverse is the mark left on the world by the men of mind, by Isaiah or
Aristotle, compared with the energies of patriots, like the Maccabees
or Sulla. Mere existence matters nothing to the present or the future;
it is the energizing influence of fresh thoughts or organization that
alone gives value to any people. Various races at present who think a
great deal of themselves have never added a single idea or capability
to the rest of the world, their status is simply that of incapable
dependence upon the civilization of others. Regarding then the dominant
importance of status, it seemed that it would be useful to focus together
the various fragments of views that have been gained as to the position
occupied by the Jewish race in Egypt at different periods.

We may glance first at the earlier relations of Semites with Egypt. The
second prehistoric civilization was of Eastern origin; and judging by the
strong analogies of the Egyptian language with Semitic speech, it seems
probable that this prehistoric age was dominated by a race which later
developed into the historic Semites.

Coming into recorded history, we can now realize, from recent
discoveries, how the VIIth and VIIIth Egyptian dynasties which overthrew
the earlier pyramid builders were Syrian kings ruling over Egypt. Their
personal names are preserved in some reigns on the great list of kings
at Abydos,[1] and their status is recorded by a cylinder of one of
these kings[2]—Khondy—bearing a figure of a flounced Syrian before him,
and an Egyptian in the background. The king himself has his name in a
cartouche and wears the crown of Upper Egypt; so he did not rule only
over the Delta, and his name being at Abydos points to control of the
whole country. As to the language, the names of these kings appear to
be Semitic, as Telulu the exalted, Shema the high, Neby the prophet.
All of this accords closely with the recent publications of Professor
Albert Clay[3] on the importance of a north Syrian kingdom, as the real
centre of the Semitic peoples, rather than Arabia, which he regards as a
backwater, where an early type has remained undisturbed. His appeal to
the Semitic names in early Babylonia shows that they are quite as early
as—or earlier than—the Sumerian.

This Semitic conquest of Egypt had a close parallel in the Hyksos
invasion of Egypt. The Hyksos or “princes of the desert,” as they call
themselves, were nomadic Semites who pushed down into Egypt during the
weak condition of the country in the XIVth dynasty. Even during the
XIIth dynasty there had been small bodies of Semites coming in, as shown
by the celebrated scene at Beni Hasan, where Absha heads a party of 37
Amu;[4] or on a scarab of User-Khepesh, who was the guardian of 110
Amu.[5] At last a flood of nomads, probably driven south by a famine
period of drought, burst into the country, much like the Arab invasion
of the age of Islam. After plundering the country they settled down,
as earlier invaders had done, by adopting the system which they had
found there, and becoming kings of Egypt, who restored and enlarged the
temples and encouraged learning.[6] They continued, however, attached to
their earlier life; and the remains of one king—Khyan—being found as far
apart as Crete and Baghdad, indicates that they kept up a wide trade,
if not an extensive rule.[7] The title adopted by that king, “embracing
territories,” shows that he probably ruled Syria as well as Egypt, like
the Syrian King Khondy in the VIIIth dynasty.

It is the nature of the Hyksos rule that enables us to realize the actual
setting of the first stage of Jewish history. It is as one of the late
waves of nomadic Hyksos that the account of Abraham must be viewed.
Wandering round the Syrian desert, as the Hyksos had done, drifting
up and down the ridge of hill pastures of Palestine, passing in and
out of Egypt as necessity led, the life in the Patriarchal narratives
gives the picture of the life of the “shepherd kings,” the “princes of
the desert.” The status of these Hebrew wanderers was just that of the
people among whom they came in Egypt, the ruling caste of the country,
who sat upon the more industrious but less independent Egyptians. They
would naturally be received with the affability, and on the easy terms,
which are represented. That this was taken in the course of the Hyksos
rule is shown by the king having adapted himself to Egyptian feeling, and
its being unsuitable to let pure nomads come in to the cultivated Delta,
because the shepherds were an abomination to the Egyptians. Hence, though
on perfectly good terms, it was preferred to keep these fresh nomads on
the border, in the Wady Tumilat, rather than revive the antagonism of the
agriculturalist. The story of Joseph falls into place most naturally in
Egypt, where even under purely Egyptian kings the highest positions could
be held by Pa-khar or Nehesi, “the Syrian” or “the negro.” That this was
during a Semitic rule is suggested by the tide of Joseph being _Abrekh_,
the _Abarakku_ minister of state of Babylonia.[8]

The great change of status took place when the Hyksos were expelled,
and any remnant of those tribes had to become serfs if they were
tolerated at all. It seems highly probable that at this time a part
of the Israelites were swept back into Palestine with the retreating
waves of defeated Hyksos. It is not only probable, but it is indicated
by the defeat of “people of Israel” in Palestine by Merneptah (recorded
on his triumphal stele)[9], at a time when the Israelites whom we know
of seem to have still been in Egypt. Of the latter portion—with whom
we are here concerned—we have only accounts of their serfdom; yet a
stray light of a different kind has lately shown that other positions
were open to them. On a large family tablet of a chief of cavalry under
Rameses II, that is during the age of oppression, the Egyptians are shown
worshipping the various gods of the country. The surprise comes where the
servants have put their names on the blank edges of the tablet, headed
by the “scribe engraver” called Yehu-naam or “Yehu-speaks”;[10] just
the converse order of the most familiar phrase, “Thus saith the Lord.”
This seems unmistakably to refer to a worshipper of Yehu or Yahveh, and
hence an Israelite. Though this is only a single name, it implies a great
deal. It shows that an Israelite during the oppression was not only an
unskilled labourer, but might be one of the most highly skilled artisans,
understanding hieroglyphics, and an artist able to draw and engrave all
the figures of the gods. This puts an especial point on the commandment
against making graven images, if Israelites were actually engaged in
that trade. Further, this man was employed as far south as the Fayum,
and thus a hundred miles from the tolerated “Jewry” of the Wady Tumilat.
The freedom which the Israelites undoubtedly had under the Hyksos makes
it likely that many may have taken up different crafts, and have been
scattered about in the country as demand and opportunity led them.

Those who remained in a servile position were not in the least in the
condition of being separately bought and sold like cattle, as in American
slavery. They were organized in regular families, with their scribes
or “officers” of themselves, under the “commanders of tribute” of the
Egyptians.[11] In short, their labour was a sort of tribal tax which they
had to render, and for which their own headmen were responsible. How and
when the individual worked was the affair of his own family and clan, and
could not be dictated by the Egyptian so long as the total output was
maintained. This is an important part of the status of labour, whether
its system is autonomous or is an individual slavery. It seems that the
status was that of a tribe heavily taxed for labour, but left to follow
its own arrangements. This could only be carried out where there was a
solid block of the Israelite population, as in the land of Goshen, the
Wady Tumilat. It does not therefore imply any special tax or disability
upon those who—like the sculptor just named—had entered on various trades
and work scattered in the country. Probably they were gradually lost to
sight in mixture with the general population.

During the age of the Judges there was a continuous decadence in Egypt,
so that on both sides it is improbable that trade led to any Jewish
settlements. The rise of the Jewish kingdom, and the regular horse
trade established by Solomon, together with his marriage to the royal
family of Tanis, Zoan, and consequent connection with the royal family
Bubastis,[12] must have led to some mercantile establishments. Still
greater familiarity with Egypt came during the increasing troubles of
the close of the Jewish kingdom. About seventy years before the fall of
Jerusalem the new Saite King, Psamtek, had established a great frontier
fort on the road to Palestine, at Tahpanhes; this was a settlement of
Greek troops, and hence open to foreign residents.[13] Whenever there
was trouble in Judæa, especially from Assyria, this fortress would be the
natural asylum of any refugees, and Greek and Jew first mixed here and
learned each other’s ways. The results of this mixture are evident in the
reference to five cities speaking the language of Canaan, and swearing by
the Lord of Hosts, and in the address of Jeremiah to the Jews which dwelt
in the land of Egypt, which dwell at Migdol, the desert frontier, and at
Tahpanhes, the Delta frontier, and at Noph, Memphis, and in the country
of Pathros, Upper Egypt,[14] calling their attention to the desolation
of Jerusalem and exhorting them therefore to give up burning incense to
other gods in the land of Egypt, where they had gone to dwell already,
more than ten years before the fall of Jerusalem. Their reply that they
had prospered when they sacrificed to the queen of heaven was met by the
prophecy that Pharaoh-Hophra should be given into the hand of his enemies
and into the hand of them that seek his life.[15] The meaning of this lay
in the politics of Egypt. Hophra was of the party that favoured Greeks
and foreigners; but there was a strong Nationalist party of Egyptians
who would exclude foreigners, and they sought the life of Hophra, and
finally dethroned and murdered him. This led to the exclusive policy
which restricted foreign residence under Amasis. This declaration was
therefore a warning against trusting to the continuance of the open
policy, under which Egypt had been a refuge to the Jews. The fugitive
remnant of the royal family and court had found what seemed a safe refuge
at Tahpanhes, where the palace-fort had been assigned to them in the
Greek camp by Hophra. There Jeremiah had buried stones in the outside
platform before the entry of Pharaoh’s house, and the fort is still
called “The palace of the Jew’s daughter.” Their patron, however, was to
fall, and the open policy with him, and Amasis was—twenty years later—to
revive the Nationalist control. He closed down all the Greek settlements
and garrisons, only leaving one treaty-port to Greek trade—that of
Naukratis;[16] and they paid for this Nationalist movement by falling
into the power of Persia in the next generation.

The Persian conquest in 525 B.C. threw open the whole country to
influences from all quarters. The series of heads of foreigners found at
Memphis shows how the Babylonian traders of the old Sumerian race flocked
in, with Indians, Kurds, and a multitude of Scythian Cossacks, besides
the ruling race of Persia itself.[17] The picture of this age of Jewish
settlement has been preserved in the papyri of Elephantine;[18] and what
took place there was assuredly exceeded by the less remote settlements
in the rest of Egypt. We find mention of a Jew living at Abydos, which
was not a centre of trade. Not only was there a Jewish colony at the
Cataract, but one large and prosperous enough to build a temple to Yaho.
This temple was older than the Persian invasion, and such a footing is
unlikely to have been a new concession by the Nationalists; it probably
dates from the time of Hophra’s foreign policy before 570.

The description of the parts which were destroyed later shows that there
were five stone doorways, implying that the walls were of brick, like
most buildings in Egypt. There were stone columns, bronze fittings to
the doors, and a roof of cedar. The vessels of the temple service were
of gold and silver. The restorations that have been proposed are rather
too extensive for a temple placed in an existing town. Probably, there
was a continuous high wall around, a large entrance gate opening on an
outer court, from that another gate leading to an inner court, at the
back of which was the colonnade of the temple front; the other three
doorways named would be that of the temple and those leading to the
store-rooms and priests’ dwellings. Though neither the place nor the size
of community would allow of a great building, it is seen that the quality
of the structure implies that the Jewish residents were on a level with
the Egyptians.

Though this temple was destroyed in 411 B.C. by the enmity of the
Egyptian priests of Khnum, and the cupidity of the Persian governor
Widarnag, yet the parties were so nearly equal that before 408 the
governor and all his accomplices had perished by violence, and, in
revenge, by 405 Yedeniyeh bar Gamariyeh, a principal Jew of Elephantine,
had to flee to Thebes, where he was killed.

Regarding the relations of Egyptians to Jews, it is notable that
proselytes were not uncommon. Ashor, an Egyptian, married a Jewess, and
took the name of Nathan; Hoshea was a son of an Egyptian, Pedu-khnum;
Hadadnuri the Babylonian had a son named Yathom, and grandson Melkiel.

Some matters of status which have been attributed to Babylonian
influence may equally well—and more probably—be simple acceptance of
the Egyptian laws. In the census for payment of the temple tax of two
shekels—presumably from householders—at least one in eight are women,
apparently holding independent property. Since in Egypt inherited
property was held by women rather than by men, this was according to
native law. In marriage contracts either party could stand up in the
congregation and denounce the marriage at any time, on payment of a fixed
penalty. This was likewise the case in Christian Coptic marriages, as
stated by a contract.[19] Hence it must be regarded as the Egyptian law,
to which the Jews conformed by necessity or habit.

Thus it appears that the status of the Jewish colonies in Egypt was
at least equal to that of any other foreigners, and that they had
assimilated native custom and law. The ideas of these settlers at
the Cataract, and probably of those elsewhere, were derived from the
habits of thought of the monarchy, quite apart from the Babylonian
particularism. There was no objection to taking an oath by the goddess of
the Cataract, for a legal declaration, like any Egyptian. This is akin
to the later Egyptian Judaism, which sought reconciliation with Gentile
principles, as in the Alexandrian school of Philo, and was entirely
opposed to the bitterly anti-Gentile school which was developed in the
Captivity.

It is evident that there was no hesitation in establishing temple worship
at the Cataract, and probably also in the other cities that “called
on the name of Yahveh,” as a substitute for the destroyed temple of
Jerusalem. This is in accord with the establishing of the temple by
Oniah some three centuries later. There was not yet the dogma that no
temple could be legitimate outside of Jerusalem: that view seems to
have been a development of the Babylonian party, probably in connection
with their rebuilding of the temple at Jerusalem on the Return from
Captivity. A rival temple would probably have been illegitimate at any
time; but if the temple of Jerusalem was destroyed, or in the heretical
hands of the Hellenic party, then it was looked on as more important
to maintain the worship, rather than to abandon it because its true
centre was unattainable. This was in accord with Western Judaism, which
would subordinate the letter of the law to keeping the spirit of it; in
contrast to Babylonian Judaism, which by concentrating on the letter of
the law forgot the more important value of it, and thus “tithed mint,
anise and cummin, and omitted the weightier matters of the law.”

That the settlement at the Cataract was not very exceptional is shown not
only by the reference to a Jewish resident of Abydos[20]—purely a centre
of Egyptian religion—but also by a discovery this year of a rock tomb
of early date which had been re-used about the fifth century B.C.[21]
and inscribed with long documents in Aramaic, equal to over fifty feet
of writing. M. Giron came to examine them, but they are so far damaged
that it would need a longer study than he could spare to transcribe them.
It is to be hoped that some other Aramaic scholar will undertake the
work. This tomb is a few miles back in the eastern desert, opposite to
Oxyrhynkhos. It proves that in this region of Middle Egypt there was also
a Jewish settlement commonly using Aramaic.

The close of the Persian age brought in new conditions under Alexander.
Wide as had been the liberty of Judaism under the international empire
of Persia, it obtained still more liberal treatment from the Macedonian
conqueror. In consequence of the assistance that the Jews had given
against the Egyptians, Alexander granted to them equal rights with
the Greeks in the new foundation of Alexandria.[22] They had there a
separate quarter called the Delta,[23] and they were allowed to be
called Macedonians,[24] to mark them as being under royal protection.
This status in Alexandria, though suspended by Caligula, was renewed by
Claudius. The Jews had also other places assigned to them in Egypt, and
were ruled by an ethnarch, who was chief judge and registrar of the whole
of the settlers.[25]

In the Fayum they naturally found space, as the province was land
reclaimed from the lake, in order to settle Greek troops as colonists. A
village of Samareia is named,[26] also Jews in Psenuris.[27] At Thebes
Simon son of Eleazar was tax collector.[28] Ptolemy Philopator tried to
curb the power of the Jews in Egypt; and the libellous retort on him is
the subject of the third book of Maccabees.[29]

The number of Jews in Egypt, and their familiarity with Greek, led
to various Greek translations of books of the Hebrew Scriptures.[30]
These, in popular rather than literary style, were probably used by
proselytes, and followed in synagogues where Hebrew was drifting out of
use. They were at last compiled, and probably completed by adding all
the remaining books which were familiar as religious literature, though
not canonical. Thus seems to have grown up the Greek version known as
the Septuagint. Its differences from the Hebrew must not all be assigned
to caprice, for its sources probably antedate the formal text of the
Masorah. It represents to some extent the sources of the final orthodox
text. The production of such a body of translation in Egypt is proof of
the large demand that must have existed in a population far more familiar
with Greek than with Hebrew.

The next chapter of the Jewish history in Egypt opens out a wide view.
The troubles in Palestine caused by the Hellenistic party seizing on
the Temple, and the persecutions by Antiochus, had driven large numbers
of Jews to settle in the Delta of Egypt; in fact, as later references
seem to show, the Eastern Delta was largely occupied by Jews. It was the
Hyksos occupation repeated, only in this case the settlement was probably
not that of pastoral nomads, but of agriculturalists and traders. The
extent of the settlement is indicated by the need for a national centre
of worship on a large scale. At first Jerusalem would of course be
entirely the focus of religion; but when the Temple fell into the hands
of the Hellenizing party, and the High-Priesthood became entirely the
prey of violence and bribery, it was more and more difficult to regard
the Holy City as a religious home. This severance, and the distance
across a long desert journey, would lead to an entire estrangement, and
the practical cessation of all Temple worship. The loss of a religious
centre, and the presence of an heir of the High-Priesthood, driven out
of Jerusalem by the crimes of his relatives, would at last lead to the
rise of a new national centre in the midst of the faithful who were
thus living in exile.[31] There must have been a large support for the
project before Oniah would venture to start so great an enterprise. The
vast amount of work that was done in constructing the new city shows
that there was a large and wealthy population involved. The letter of
application for the site, and the reply granted by Ptolemy VII, seem
quite in accord with the times, and there is no reason to suppose
that this title-deed of occupation would be lost to sight, and then
re-invented.

The site having been granted, of a deserted city, with ruins of an
Egyptian palace of Rameses III, and a massive fortification wall of the
Hyksos period, there was abundant material for constructing the new city.
A large area was laid out beyond the wall of the old city, deliberately
modelled upon the plan of Jerusalem and the temple hill. So close is the
copy that Professor Dickie in his study of Jerusalem could combine the
plans to help in restoring the detail of Jerusalem. The old Egyptian site
was adopted as equivalent to the town of Jerusalem, and the new hill
was constructed to copy the Temple, and continued northward to imitate
Bezetha, leaving a deep gap representing the Tyropœan valley. To throw up
these great artificial hills, to face the temple hill with stone walling,
up to 100 feet high, to lay out the new city and the fortifications
covering six acres, must have needed a large body of supporters, and is
the strongest evidence of the numbers and status of the Jews in this
district, about twenty-eight miles north of Memphis.

The status of the Jewish settlers in Egypt was influential. Oniah, the
heir of the High-Priesthood, was associated with Dositheos, another Jew,
as generals of the whole army of Ptolemy VII.[32] He later supported
the widowed queen against the attacks of Ptolemy Physcon.[32] He lived
at Alexandria, and seems to have been powerful in the court. We also
read of an adventurous Jew named Yosef,[33] who outbid all the tax
farmers and obtained great power, which was extortionately used in the
Ptolemaic province of Palestine. Under Ptolemy VII also we find the Jews
of Athribis,[34] the central city of the Delta, dedicating a synagogue.
The spread of Jewish settlement was far beyond the city of Oniah, as
in Caesar’s time the march of troops from Pelusium to Alexandria was
dependent on the goodwill of the Jews of Onion.[35] The road between
those cities is more than fifty miles north of the city of Oniah, and
it seems therefore that the settlement which was in allegiance to that
city must have extended over most of the eastern side of the Delta. As
the Jews were already sharing Alexandria on equal terms with the Greeks,
they must have pretty well absorbed the management of the Delta. It is
in this connection that we must view the statement that they had “entire
custody of the Nile on all occasions.”[36] Probably as holding mortgages
on interest in much of the land of the Delta, they organized a management
of the inundation to ensure the solvency of their securities. The modern
Debt Control taking over the management of the Irrigation Department is
the parallel to the Jewish custody of the Nile.

There was also another and entirely different side of Jewish life in
Egypt. In Josephus we read a long account of the Essenes,[37] to which
sect this Pharisee of the High-Priestly family had devoted himself in
his youth. This account of the Ascetics of Palestine so closely accords
with the account that the Alexandrian Jew Philo gives of the Therapeutae
in Egypt[38] that they seem to be identical. This spread of asceticism
appears to have been started by the Buddhist mission from India. It was
entirely foreign to the Western ideals, yet it took root quickly after
Asoka’s mission. Indian figures are found of this period at Memphis, and
a multitude of modelled heads of foreigners also found there,[17] can
only be paralleled by the modelled heads of foreigners made now for a
Buddhist festival in Tibet, and thrown away as soon as the ceremony is
over. The influence which thus came into Egypt with the Indians of the
Persian occupation is found in working order by 340 B.C., and it was
probably strengthened and organized by the Buddhist mission in 260 B.C.,
and so grew until we meet with the full description of long-established
communities in the pages of Philo and Josephus. These bodies were
apparently composed of philosophical Jews and proselytes largely
influenced by the Alexandrine mixture of Oriental beliefs with Greek
theorizing.

Though we are reviewing the status of the Jews, that must include their
intellectual as well as social position. The Alexandrian school of
thought, as we have it in the Hermetic books[39] and in Philo, was a new
development in the world, freely reasoning on the nature of God and of
man, starting from various beliefs which were chosen for their prominence
and compatibility, and coming to conclusions which are curiously similar
to some modern thought. These ideas are the ground for various dogmas
which naturally grew up from it in the development of that Jewish sect of
Christianity.

We turn from these recluses back to the busy world of the Roman age,
when troops for Caesar at Alexandria were collected by his General
Mithradates, but stuck at Askelon, hindered by the desert and the
Delta.[40] Antipater, a Jewish general with 3,000 Jewish troops, joined
him, organized the desert transport with the Arabs, and then forced the
fortress of Pelusium. On entering Egypt Antipater brought over the Jews
of the Delta to the Caesarian cause, and so opened the way across to
Alexandria, and this induced the Memphite Jews also to join Caesar. This
service was handsomely acknowledged by Caesar.

Augustus rewarded the fidelity of the Alexandrian Jews by giving them a
renewal of all the rights and privileges of equality with the Greeks,[41]
which they had in the original charter of Alexander. They had an ethnarch
and a council, or a president and parliament, of their own; but the
Alexandrian Greeks by their opposition to Augustus lost their right to a
senate.

Trouble began with the insane Caligula,[42] who tried to force the
worship of his own statues in every place. The Jewish refusal of this
demand cost them the withdrawal of all rights of citizenship.[43] The
Greeks then thought it an opportunity for a pogrom to revenge their
subordination under Augustus.[43] On the accession of Claudius the Jews
started a riot to avenge themselves on the Greeks.[44] The influence of
Agrippa, which had checked the persecution of the Jews before, shielded
them again at Rome. Claudius therefore sent a decree,[45] reciting the
equality of the Jews and Greeks in Alexandria from its foundation, and
the renewal of the rights by Augustus. Another more general decree was
published in the Empire, honouring the fidelity of the Jews to the
Romans, and declaring that they were in all countries to keep their
ancient customs without hindrance: “And I do charge them also to use this
my kindness to them with moderation, and not to show a contempt of the
superstitious observances of other nations, but to keep their own laws
only.” By the end of his reign, however, Claudius ejected all Jews from
Rome.[46] Under Nero there was an attempt of Egyptian Jews to liberate
Jerusalem.[47] That failing, there was a renewed riot in the theatre at
Alexandria between Jews and Greeks, ending in calling in the legions to
plunder the Jewish quarter; in hard fight and massacre after it 50,000
are said to have been killed.[48] This seems to have broken the Jewish
hold on the capital, and we do not hear of any more turmoil with the Jews
in Alexandria.

The great war in Palestine and destruction of Jerusalem immediately after
Nero’s reign put an end to Jewish aspirations for a long time. At last a
general conspiracy broke out when Trajan was engaged in Parthia, and the
Jews in Cyrene, Egypt, Cyprus, Palestine and Mesopotamia broke out in
revolt and massacre.[49] Nearly half a million Greeks were slaughtered
in Cyrene and Cyprus.[50] In Egypt all Greeks about the country were
massacred, or driven into Alexandria for refuge, where they massacred
all Jews left in that city. All of this history shows that in numbers
and power the Jews were almost the equals of the Greek population, their
close organization perhaps making up for lesser numbers. The retaliation
by the Roman legions was naturally a full reply to the destruction which
had been dealt out to the Greeks. Henceforward there was no united action
of the Jews.

The great settlement of Onion, occupying most of the eastern Delta, was
depleted at the destruction of Jerusalem by Titus. The Temple of the
new Jerusalem was closed in 71 A.C. by Lupus the Prefect;[51] finally,
Paulinus within the next few years stripped the place, drove out the
priests, shut the gates, and left the place to decay. This repression
was not sheer persecution on the part of the Romans, but was caused by
the Zealots, who had made the worst of the Palestine war, escaping to
Egypt, and going even as far as Thebes.[52] In the interest of peace it
was needful to abolish a religious centre which might have been made a
rallying point for later trouble.

Although history scarcely mentions the Jews in Egypt for some centuries,
they were by no means expelled. As traders, perhaps as cultivators, they
kept a place in the country. A surprise has come in the last few weeks
by the discovery at Oxyrhynkhos, in Middle Egypt, of fragments of four
papyri written in Hebrew, as early as the third century. These are thus
the oldest Hebrew writings known, apart from stone inscriptions. The age
of them is given by another papyrus found with them dated under Severus,
193-211 A.C. One Hebrew writing is on part of a Greek document, which by
the hand is probably of the third century. The style of the Hebrew will
quite agree to this, as it is closely like the synagogue inscriptions
of the first century, as pointed out by Professor Hirschfeld, who has
examined these papyri and made a preliminary transcript. With these
letters are scraps of a liturgical work on parchment with minute writing.
Two of the papyri appear to be dirges, one on the destruction of the
Temple. Another papyrus has Jewish names, Joel, Nehemiah, and others.

Though the Jewish half of Alexandria had been severely, if not
altogether, reduced in the great rebellion under Trajan, there had been
a large return of those who were attracted by the powerful centre of
commerce and activity. Once more a pogrom broke out, from the fanatical
Cyril in 415, who expelled the Jews, while the mob sacked the Jewish
quarter.[53] Yet they returned, as, a couple of centuries later, at the
conquest by Islam the Jews were expressly allowed to remain, according to
the articles of capitulation.[54] During the rule of Islam the position
of the Jew has fluctuated like that of the Christian. Restrictive laws
have sometimes been passed, as that of El Hakim, ordering Jews to
wear bells or to carry a wooden calf,[55] or the later restriction to
wearing yellow turbans.[56] Yet Jews have risen to high power, as the
slave-dealer who became supreme in the childhood of Ma’add about 1040,
and set Sadaka, a renegade Jew, as vizier in 1044.[57] Though in recent
times the Oriental Jew has little hold in Egypt, the European Jew has
been a moving force in finance and enterprise.

The general conclusion appears that Egypt from its position and its
fertility has always attracted the Jew. It has had therefore a notable
influence on the mental attitude, especially in the Alexandrian school of
the Wisdom literature and Philo. The status of the Jewish population has
been fully equal to that of the other important races, native and Greek,
especially in the great Jewish occupation under the Ptolemies, which was
perhaps the age of the greatest political power in Jewish history.




REFERENCES IN TEXT


[1] Petrie, _History_, i, Fig. 6.

[2] Petrie, _Scarabs_, xix; _Egypt and Israel_, Fig. 1.

[3] Clay, _Empire of the Amorites_.

[4] Petrie, _Egypt and Israel_, Figs. 2, 5.

[5] Petrie, _Scarabs_, xv, A.C.

[6] Petrie, _History_, i, Apepa 1.

[7] _History_, i, Khyan.

[8] Hastings, _Dict. Bib._, _Abrekh_.

[9] Petrie, _Six Temples_, 28.

[10] To appear in _Herakleopolis_.

[11] Ex. v. 14.

[12] _Egypt and Israel_, 68.

[13] Petrie, _Tanis_, 11; _Defenneh_, 48-53.

[14] Jer. xliv. 1.

[15] Jer. xliv. 30.

[16] Petrie, _Naukratis_, 7.

[17] Petrie, _Memphis_, 1, xxxvi-xl.

[18] Hoonacker, _Une Communauté Judéo-Araméenne_.

[19] Petrie, _Gizeh and Rifeh_, 42.

[20] Hoonacker, 39.

[21] To appear in _Oxyrhynkhos_.

[22] Josephus, _Wars_, II, xviii, 7.

[23] _Wars_, II, xviii, 8.

[24] _Wars_, II, xviii, 7.

[25] Josephus, from Strabo, _Antiq._, XIV, vii, 2.

[26] Mahaffy, _History of Egypt_, 92.

[27] Mahaffy, 93.

[28] Mahaffy, 192.

[29] Mahaffy, 145.

[30] Thackeray, St. J., _The Septuagint and Jewish Worship_, 11-13.

[31] Petrie, _Egypt and Israel_, 98-101.

[32] Josephus, _Cont. Apion_, ii, 5.

[33] _Antiq._, XII, iv.

[34] Mahaffy, 192-3.

[35] _Wars_, I, ix, 4.

[36] _Cont. Apion_, ii, 5, end.

[37] _Wars_, II, viii.

[38] Petrie, _Personal Religion in Egypt_, 63.

[39] _Pers. Relig._, 38.

[40] _Antiq._, XIV, viii.

[41] Milne, _History of Egypt_, 16.

[42] _Antiq._, XVIII, viii.

[43] Milne, 29, 30.

[44] Milne, 31, 32.

[45] _Antiq._, XIX, v. 2, 3.

[46] Acts xviii. 1.

[47] Milne, 35.

[48] _Wars_, II, xviii, 8.

[49] Milne, 52.

[50] Dion Cassius, Trajan, end.

[51] _Wars_, VII, x, 4.

[52] _Wars_, VII, x, 1.

[53] Milne, 98-9.

[54] Stanley Lane-Poole, _History of Egypt_, 11.

[55] Lane-Poole, 127.

[56] Lane-Poole, 301.

[57] Lane-Poole, 137.




APPENDIX

ANCIENT HEBREW PAPYRI

PROVISIONAL TRANSLATION BY DR. H. HIRSCHFELD


FRAGMENT A

   LINE

     1. (relic of selah [?]).

     2. Wells ... hewn ...

     3. To lead ... to this ...

     4. They rejoice ... they decay ...

     5. In the light, or (with ח added) the path ...

     6. Of the Temple ... He has put to shame ...

     7. They trembled, languished, turned to Thee ...

     8. With glee and holy convocation ...

     9. In the assembly of holy myriads ...

    10. When mountain peaks frowned (see Psalm lxviii. 16-17) ...

    11. Myrrh and cinnamon ...

    12. I am inundated with tribulation ...

    13. ...

    14. Kings ...

    15. Engraved.

    16. Remember and ...

    17. ?

(_Probably a lament on the destruction of the Temple._)


FRAGMENT B

     1. ?

     2. surrounding (?)

     3. ?

     4. path ?

     5.

     6. upon the earth (land ?).


FRAGMENT C

     1. ? ?

     2. ?

     3. ?

     4. ... males ...

     5. ... and avenge the sanctuary ...

     6. Thou hast ... ? us a kingdom of priests ...

     7. ... a kingdom ... ?


FRAGMENT D

     1 to 5. illegible and untranslatable.

     6. Joel ... ?

     7. And Nehemiah. Nahor ... ? in judgement (?).

     8 to 10. illegible ...

       *       *       *       *       *

    _Printed in Great Britain by_
    UNWIN BROTHERS, LIMITED
    LONDON AND WOKING





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Status of the Jews in Egypt, by 
W. M. Flinders Petrie

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STATUS OF THE JEWS IN EGYPT ***

***** This file should be named 56444-0.txt or 56444-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/6/4/4/56444/

Produced by MFR and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

